Good morning, Catherine.
Good morning. Uh, can you see me?
We can see you, yes. You can see and hear us
Alright? Yes,
I can see and hear you.
Alright, thank you. Well, we have, uh, thank you.
We have five minutes set down for your submission.
We've received your written submission,
but, uh, we hand over to you now to speak to that.
Okay. Well, um, I'd like to say that I'm opposed
to this bill, that the Ansec was established for the people
of Australia and New Zealand.
And, uh, and if any other war people want
to come in, then they have to establish their own
a separate, um, a separate war Veterans Institute.
Uh, the, an Australia
and New Zealand Anzac is particular to
the war against Germany in 1944
and 1914, to which these two countries, the people
of Germany who have been held in captivity, uh, since
1843, um, uh, have still not been reconciled
with the, uh, Anzac troops.
And we continue to be ostracized to this day.
Um, at the time of the war in 1944,
the German, uh, naturalized people were beaten up,
lost their jobs, had their churches burned down,
attacked their houses were raided, women were raped,
and, uh, they, uh, were th they were not even allowed
to leave New Zealand under the Wars Act.
Some people wanted to leave New Zealand
and were not able to do so.
At one point, uh, my, uh, ancestor went to the court
and did not want to go to fight against Germany,
his own country and his own people, and they Bertram sexists
and they dragged him out of the court case, uh, out
of the court and forced him to go to war.
Uh, the, there was several New Zealand Maori
that were half cast Germans, who were also beaten up
and spied on and treated badly, who were hidden by
Princess Tapia.
Uh, and, uh, the people that she had, uh,
they were caught by the New Zealand police
and they were dragged off
and sent to war against their will.
Uh, several people were held on Sos Island
and they put war weapons on the SOS island so
that it would be considered an enemy territory,
and that if Germany flew over there,
they would be within their rights to bomber.
So those people were held, uh, there
and the, uh, United Nations had to order New Zealand
to remove those weapons.
And even after the war, those people were not permitted
to return to their homelands of Germany.
Germany. And this has never been reconciled
by the New Zealand government.
In 19, uh, 29,
the New Zealand government was ordered to return all,
um, article, uh, all, uh, subject to the provisions
and stipulations contained in the following articles release
and when necessary, WeTransfer to the original German owners
or to the persons deriving title through them,
their property rights and interests within New Zealand
and her territories originally belonging to him,
and now subject to a charge created in Pursu
of the Treaty of for Sales.
And I would say that this reconciliation has never occurred.
So before we start adding all these other countries,
Ukraine, um, uh, Afghanistan, it's time
that the New Zealand government recognized the German
nationals that were treated extremely badly in 1944
and have never rightfully been returned, anything
that's belonging to them.
Um, so, uh, uh,
and finally, I think that's all I have to say.
Finally. Oh, I do would like to say that in, um,
1983, the English laws
of 1858, which held the blasphemy law, section 14,
the will of Jesus was illegally removed
by the New Zealand government, which was, um, part
of the agreement when in 1843 when the Germans
were forced to leave Germany
and forced to go to New Zealand, that they would be forever,
uh, protected under the English Laws Act.
And that was removed illegally
and there ought to be a, an inquiry into that situation.
Uh, the Australian
and New Zealand, uh, people, uh, ought to, uh, be able
to reconcile with Germany
and the German nationals of Australia and New Zealand
before any alterations
to the Anzac agreement may be held.
Um, I'm not going to be
allowing any questions today, I'm sorry.
Um, because I'll be, um, uh, predisposed
with other important issues. Thank you very much.
Okay. Well thank you for joining us this morning.
Appreciate it. Sure. Okay, we'll move on
to the next submitter.
Diane Landy
online as well.
Yeah.
Good morning, Diane. Uh, good morning. Excellent. All right.
Right. Uh, thank you for your time joining us this morning.
We've received your submission.
Uh, we have five minutes set down to hear from you today,
and we'll hand over to you.
You may wish to leave time for questions. Up to you.
Thank you.
Good morning. I'm Di Landy from Man Cordero
and thank you for the opportunity to make the submission.
This bill appears at first glance to be a reasonable update
to the 1966 Anzac Amendment, while allowing
for commemoration of other New Zealand servicemen
and women who have died in the line
of duty since the Anzacs first landed act oli.
But on closer examination, it contains wording what suggests
that the goal of this bill is not so much
to honor our fallen,
but to rewrite the origin story of our nationhood
and of our sister nation relationship with Australians.
The sacrifice and courage of the anzacs
and the story tells us something about ourselves,
who we were beginning
to become here all together in these southern islands
and who we remain
and want to continue to strive to be, we are reminded
by the actions that we can be brave, willing, resourceful,
and good humor under extreme pressure,
and that we share a common character
and can unite the authors of this bill, say they're desirous
of being more inclusive.
And to borrow one of the phrases so favored by inclusivity,
advocates intend to decenter the anzacs themselves
and all of our best qualities to make way
for apparently everybody who's ever heard of New Zealand.
The bill is more overreach from this government
for a misguided purpose of the taxpayer dime.
Our history has been rapidly o overwritten, like
so much outdated code,
and nobody seems to see the cost to all
of us financial and otherwise.
I recognize that veterans affairs
and others have consulted on this bill,
and yet the details leave me wondering if this consultation,
like so many others in recent years was held only
with the top brass and left out the veterans themselves
or indeed of the purpose of the extra inclusivity
or spelled out to anyone.
I would like Anzac Day to stay as Anzac Day
and for this bill to be discarded as unnecessary
or altered significantly.
The services and commemorations
as currently conducted acknowledge the sacrifice
of New Zealand Defense Force members from other conflicts.
And there is no reason why an additional
timeline cannot be included
that continues this acknowledgement.
However, there is equally no reason to list everyone
who has ever been tangentially involved
with the New Zealand Defense Force
and very good reason not to.
Other countries already commemorate and honor their dead.
And we recognize and uphold these relationships
and memories in any number of ways.
But Anzac today is for us and for Australians.
We need our history and our stories to tell the truth.
Not to change with fashionable, but partisan
and short-lived ideas about inclusivity.
World War I and the Anzacs also remain an important part
of global history and how our,
how we are perceived internationally.
Many things were initiated from World War I
that are still current and relevant today, are we
to simply retell our story to the world
and nevermind what the cost to their knowledge of us
and our role in the world will be.
What kind of diplomacy
and inter international relations is this?
Why must this bill include every ward to date
and those yet to happen?
Don't you think this is a bit concerning?
Not only is the bill attempting to reframe our history
and minimize our founding unified moment,
but it seeks to control it into the future.
Towards that have not even happened yet.
As artificial intelligence is increasingly used
to write histories and essays, our stories will be recorded
with this new slant.
For always in practice.
This treasured commemoration
for New Zealand in Australia will become nothing more than
empty participation awards, especially considering the wards
yet to happen part.
I would also like to see a more coherent
and specific definition of war-like conflict.
If the bill succeeds,
the government will once again be telling
people what to think.
On Anzac Day of all days, people who go
to Anzac Dawn Services whose whanau have
or are still doing tours of duty, are already thinking
of their loved ones, their whanau, and first
and foremost in their minds and prayers.
They do not need to be reminded in this way to be inclusive
or to not forget
that others from other places have died too.
We are entitled to a day to remember our own,
and that day has been part
of my life since I was a little girl.
It is stable, consistent, and meaningful.
And now the government wants to change it to be inclusive
by reducing the role of the anzacs.
I've had enough of state forced inclusion.
What new laws will follow from this, who benefits not us,
not our veterans, and not our defense forces.
I hope you will reconsider
and reread this bill more carefully
and ask yourselves these questions.
Les, we forget.
All right, thank you very much for those insights.
I appreciate you taking the time.
Have we got any questions for members?
Hello. Thanks for your time.
Di, just so I've understood it correctly, are you saying
you'd like to leave it as it is, so it includes people
who have served up to the Vietnam War
or you would include those who have served in conflict zones
between Vietnam and today?
Or you want to go just back to those on Gallipoli?
No, no. To date Tim to date.
And a sentence could do that without including
everyone from everywhere.
I understand. Thank you. Thank you. That's helpful.
Appreciate that. Thank you. Thank you.
Okay, our next submitter, Jacob Simonson, is uh, not
the meeting as an attended.
Okay. Alright.
That then brings an end to this portion
of the hearings will be.